Add Cluster Diagnostics topic and Self-Test section (#1152)
redpanda-data/documentation: docs/manage/cluster-maintenance/cluster-diagnostics.mdx

---
title: Cluster Diagnostics
---

<head>
    <meta name="title" content="Cluster Diagnostics | Redpanda Docs"/>
    <meta name="description" content="Use tools and tests to help diagnose and debug a Redpanda cluster."/>
</head>

Use tools and tests to help diagnose and debug a Redpanda cluster.

## Disk and network self-test benchmarks

When anomalous behavior arises in a cluster and you're trying to figure out whether it's caused by faulty hardware (disks, NICs) of a cluster's machines, run [rpk cluster self-test](../../../reference/rpk/rpk-cluster/rpk-cluster-self-test) (self-test) to characterize their performance and compare it with their expected, vendor-specified performance.

> Self-test runs a set of benchmarks to determine the maximum performance of a machine's disks and NICs. For disks, it runs throughput and latency tests by reading and writing messages sequentially. For NICs, it selects unique pairs of Redpanda nodes as client/server pairs, then it runs a throughput test between the pairs. Self-test runs each benchmark for a configurable duration (default: 5 seconds), and it returns IOPS, throughput, and latency metrics.

Reviewer: Maybe instead of `NIC` lets say `network` because the network benchmark is bound by that.

> Self-test runs a set of benchmarks to determine the maximum performance of a machine's disks and NICs. For disks, it runs throughput and latency tests by reading and writing messages sequentially. For NICs, it selects unique pairs of Redpanda nodes as client/server pairs, then it runs a throughput test between the pairs. Self-test runs each benchmark for a configurable duration (default: 5 seconds), and it returns IOPS, throughput, and latency metrics.

Reviewer: For disks lets say `by performing concurrent sequential operations`

> Self-test runs a set of benchmarks to determine the maximum performance of a machine's disks and NICs. For disks, it runs throughput and latency tests by reading and writing messages sequentially. For NICs, it selects unique pairs of Redpanda nodes as client/server pairs, then it runs a throughput test between the pairs. Self-test runs each benchmark for a configurable duration (default: 5 seconds), and it returns IOPS, throughput, and latency metrics.

Reviewer: The default has been changes to 30 seconds

### Self-test command examples

To begin using self-test, run the `start` command.

```

> rpk cluster self-test start

Author: Will add links to the rpk command references with the options, including -h

---
title: Cluster Diagnostics
---

<head>
    <meta name="title" content="Cluster Diagnostics | Redpanda Docs"/>

>     <meta name="description" content="Use tools and tests to help diagnose and debug a Redpanda cluster."/>

Reviewer 2: Make sure this description is minimally 160-180 characters.

</head>

> Use tools and tests to help diagnose and debug a Redpanda cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This topic describes tools and tests you can use to help diagnose and debug a Redpanda cluster.
```

## Disk and network self-test benchmarks

When anomalous behavior arises in a cluster and you're trying to figure out whether it's caused by faulty hardware (disks, NICs) of a cluster's machines, run [rpk cluster self-test](../../../reference/rpk/rpk-cluster/rpk-cluster-self-test) (self-test) to characterize their performance and compare it with their expected, vendor-specified performance.

Self-test runs a set of benchmarks to determine the maximum performance of a machine's disks and network connections. For disks, it runs throughput and latency tests by performing concurrent sequential operations. For networks, it selects unique pairs of Redpanda nodes as client/server pairs, then it runs throughput tests between them. Self-test runs each benchmark for a configurable duration, and it returns IOPS, throughput, and latency metrics.

### Self-test command examples

> To begin using self-test, run the `self-test start` command. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To use self-test, run the `self-test start` command. 
```

```
rpk cluster self-test start
```

For command help, run `rpk cluster self-test start -h`. For additional command flags, see the [rpk cluster self-test start](../../../reference/rpk/rpk-cluster/rpk-cluster-self-test-start) reference.

Before it starts, `self-test start` asks for your confirmation to run its potentially large workload.

<details>
<summary>Example start output</summary>

```
$ rpk cluster self-test start

> ? Invoking the redpanda self tests may put excessive pressure on your system. It attempts to benchmark disk and network hardware to find their max throughputs. Its advised to not start the test if there are already large workloads running on the system. (Y/n)
> Redpanda self-test has started, test identifier: "031be460-246b-46af-98f2-5fc16f03aed3", To check the status run:
>    rpk cluster self-test status    

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
? Invoking the redpanda self test may put excessive pressure on your system. It attempts to benchmark disk and network hardware to find their max throughputs. It's advised to not start the test if there are already large workloads running on the system. (y/n)
Redpanda self-test has started, test identifier: "031be460-246b-46af-98f2-5fc16f03aed3". To check the status run:
   rpk cluster self-test status    
```

Reviewer 2: ^^ I know this is the output, am am thinking maybe you can share with eng so they update it--not a good reflection on Redpanda with these mistakes. Thx.

Author: Yes, I'm coordinating with @graphcareful to get fixes for UX/help text into rpk's repo.

Author: @graphcareful - I thought I could suggest edits within the https://github.com/redpanda-data/redpanda/pull/8398 PR, but I don't see that option available. (Is it a disabled GH repo setting? redpanda documentation has it enabled.) So, I'm going to edit the text within this PR to reflect the desired text, then we'll port it to rpk.
